# A comprehensive, archipelago-wide taxonomic re-assessment of the genus Bronchocela (Squamata: Agamidae) in the Philippines, with descriptions of three new species

Authors: Christian E. Supsup, Kier Mitchel E. Pitogo, Perry L. Wood Jr., and Rafe M. Brown

Abstract: One challenge for species delimitation involves closely-related species, characterized by both intra- and interspecifically variable morphologies, but which lack genetic information. One such example is exhibited by agamid lizards of the genus *Bronchocela*. This group of conspicuously vibrant green lizards is widely distributed in Southeast Asia, with 15 recognized species. However, the geographic distribution of several named taxa has remained unclear because of the indiscriminate application of names in taxonomic summaries and faunal checklists. For more than a century, many authors have assumed that a few, so-called “widespread” species persist throughout nearly the entirety of the range of the genus. This is particularly true for populations identified as *B*. *cristatella* and, to a lesser extent, *B*. *marmorata* in the Philippines. In this study, we reassess the systematics and taxonomy of *Bronchocela* populations in the Philippine archipelago and utilize integrative analyses of both molecular and morphological data, to reveal four distinct lineages of Philippine *Bronchocela*—all of which we interpret as distantly related to *B*. *cristatella* from Peninsular Malaysia and Indonesia (Java) —and which, we argue, must now be interpreted as Philippine endemic species. With the strong congruence in molecular and morphological analyses, we now consider populations from Luzon (including Catanduanes, Marinduque, Lubang and Polillo Islands), Romblon Province (Tablas, Romblon, and Sibuyan islands), and the West Visayas (Negros, Guimaras, Panay islands) as B. marmorata. We also recognize three new distinctive species from Mindoro (*B*. *carestiai*), Palawan (*B*. *mallarii*), and Mindanao (B. bonachitae) faunal regions. Overall, our findings demonstrate how conspicuous and widely distributed species in Southeast Asia remain poorly understood, overlooked, and taxonomically unresolved. Hence, the taxonomic resolution of Bronchocela populations in the island archipelagoes of Southeast Asia will greatly benefit from the urgent priority of determining to which landmass the name "*Bronchocela cristatella*”
